Alzheimer's disease
The earliest cognitive deficit is impairment of so-called episodic memory (memories for events or episodes, including day-to-day memory and new learning), which is thought to reflect the earliest site of pathology in the medial temporal lobe structures. 'Minimal or mild cognitive impairment' ( MCI) is a term increasingly used for people who are impaired on episodic memory tasks but who do not otherwise fit the criteria for a diagnosis of dementia. It is becoming clear that many, if not all, such people are in the predementia or early stage of AD, but progression to a full-blown dementia syndrome can take several years. The main clinical features at this stage are severe forgetfulness with often repetitive questioning and impairments in social function or job performance particularly concerning the retention of new information. As the disease progresses to mild Alzheimer's disease, memory function worsens, particularly affecting recall (for example, forgetting recent visits or family events), increasing disability in managing complex day-to-day activities such as finances and shopping, mental inflexibility and poor concentration, which reflects involvement of attentional and executive function. Insight is variably affected, often patients retain a partial awareness into their difficulties but underestimate the extent of the problem. Remote memory is relatively well preserved with a temporally graded pattern (that is, sparing of most distant memories). As the disease continues to progress patients often develop impairments in language, most typically word-finding difficulties, a shrinking vocabulary, and poor understanding of complex words and concepts. Visuospatial impairments and apraxia, which may develop at this stage, are particularly disabling, causing difficulty in dressing, cooking, and performing other daily activities. In a small subgroup of patients, language or visuospatial difficulties can be the first or most prominent presenting feature. As the cognitive deficits progress there is worsening of language function and semantic memory, and behavioural problems can be prominent. Neuropsychiatric symptoms are also common in the earliest stages of AD, particularly apathy, anxiety, and mood disturbance. Delusions and hallucinations occur in
up to 50 and 30 per cent of patients, respectively, in the later stages. Agitation, restlessness, wandering, and disinhibition also cause considerable carer burden. The final stages of the disease are characterized by reduced speech output (or mutism), ambulatory difficulties, dependence, and incontinence. Seizures and myoclonus are common late features. There is considerable variation in the time to this stage, but the average time from diagnosis to death is around 10 years. Neurological examination is unremarkable in the early stages, although increased tone (often frontal resistant, or gegenhalten, in type) and mild extrapyramidal features can occur as the disease progresses. Reflex changes such as extensor plantar responses (Babinski reflex) and—in contrast to frontotemporal dementia—pout, snout, and grasp reflexes occur late. In the final stages, there can be greatly increased rigidity and joint contractures.