Alzheimer's disease 
The aims of neuropsychological, imaging, and laboratory investigations in Alzheimer's disease are twofold: first to exclude other potentially reversible causes of dementia, and second to confirm the diagnosis of probable Alzheimer's disease. The extent and nature of investigation obviously needs to be tailored to the individual, but all patients should undergo brain imaging and have a neuropsychological assessment to confirm the diagnosis of dementia. The neuropsychological profile can also be informative in the differential diagnosis of dementia (see Table 2). Particularly characteristic is early impairment in delayed verbal recall of new material, followed by reduced category fluency (in which subjects are asked to generate exemplars from a given category, for example 'animals'), impaired naming of low-frequency words, and difficulty with complex visuospatial tasks such as copying complex figures or block design from the revised Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS-R). The basic laboratory investigations required in all patients, particularly to exclude treatable causes of dementia, and some of the other investigations that may be indicated in certain cases depending on the patient's age, family history, or specific medical history are shown in Table 4. Research into biological markers of AD is yet to yield a consistent biological or surrogate marker. Screening for specific gene mutations in young-onset familial cases is only available in specialist centres.	
Magnetic resonance imaging scans of patients with Alzheimer's disease in the earliest stages (including MCI) show evidence of atrophy of the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex (parahippocampal gyrus) reflecting the pathology ( Fig. 5). Unfortunately, the variability in size of these structures in normal elderly subjects means that, at present, these imaging abnormalities are not specific enough to be of predictive value. The co-registration of serial MRIs appears capable of detecting abnormal rates of brain atrophy, even before the onset of clear-cut cognitive symptoms in at-risk familial cases, but it remains a research instrument. T2-weighted MRI often reveals periventricular high-signal changes even in 'pure' early-onset cases. Single-photon emission computed tomography ( SPECT) scans similarly demonstrate typical abnormalities in the parietotemporal regions but the specificity is again low in individual cases. More recent technological developments, such as perfusion MRI, magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS), and photon emission tomography (PET) scans may enhance diagnostic accuracy but are expensive and not yet suitable for routine clinical use.