Dementia with Lewy bodies
Clinical features
Patients typically present with a progressive cognitive decline paralleling that seen in those with Alzheimer's disease. There are, however, a number of characteristic
and distinguishing features. First, there is a tendency to marked spontaneous fluctuations in cognitive abilities, particularly alertness and attention, producing a
delirious state lasting days or even weeks. Second, visual hallucinations, illusions, and fleeting misidentification phenomena occur in 50 to 80 per cent of sufferers even at an early stage and without drug provocation. The hallucinations are commonly well-formed images of people or animals. The marked cholinergic deficit is postulated to be the cause of their tendency to visual hallucinations. Third, is the occurrence of spontaneous parkinsonism, which is usually mild in the early stages. Rigidity, gait disturbance, and bradykinesia are all common, although in contrast to patients with Parkinson's disease the tremor is usually mild and atypical (with postural and action components) and symmetrical. Repeated falls also occur. In the later stages the akinetic rigid syndrome can cause severe disabilities in mobility and swallowing an increase in the number of falls. Fourth, there is often an exquisite sensitivity to neuroleptic medication, producing the malignant neuroleptic syndrome (delirium, hyperpyrexia, muscle rigidity, massive elevation of creatine phosphokinase, and renal failure).
Diagnosis
Neuropsychologically there is a mixture of subcortical and cortical features, with prominent cognitive slowing plus impairment of executive (planning and organizational abilities) and visuoperceptual abilities. Compared with patients with Alzheimer's disease, those with DLB tend to have greater deficits in attention and visuospatial processing. Memory loss may be less prominent than in Alzheimer's disease. There is no diagnostic test for this condition and the diagnosis in vivo relies on the clinical features described above and in Table 6. Brain imaging demonstrates similar changes to Alzheimer's disease, although there is a suggestion that medial temporal lobe atrophy is less pronounced.