Frontotemporal dementia
Frontal presentations
Patients present with insidiously progressive changes in personality and behaviour that reflect the early locus of pathology in ventromedial frontal lobes. There is often impaired judgement, an indifference to domestic and professional responsibilities, and a lack of initiation and apathy. Social skills deteriorate and there can be socially inappropriate behaviour, fatuousness, jocularity, abnormal sexual behaviour, or theft. Many patients are restless with an obsessive–compulsive behaviour, such as hoarding food. Emotional lability and mood swings are seen, but other psychiatric phenomena such as delusions and hallucinations are rare. Patients become rigid and stereotyped in their daily routines and food choices. A change in food preference towards sweet foods is very characteristic. Of importance is the fact that simple bedside cognitive screening tests such as the Mini-Mental State Examination ( MMSE) are insensitive at detecting frontal abnormalities. More detailed neuropsychological tests of frontal function (such as the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test or the Stroop Test) usually show abnormalities. Speech output can be reduced with a tendency to echolalia (repeating the examiner's last phrase). Memory is relatively spared in the early stages, although it does deteriorate as the disease advances. Visuospatial function remains remarkably unaffected. Primary motor and sensory functions remain normal. Primitive reflexes such as snout, pout, and grasp develop during the disease process. Muscle fasciculations, or wasting particularly affecting the bulbar musculature, can develop in the FTD subtype associated with motor neurone disease.
Temporal presentations
Temporal lobe degeneration presents with a form of progressive fluent aphasia, also known as semantic dementia, in which there is a profound loss in conceptual knowledge (or semantic memory) causing anomia and impaired comprehension of words, objects, or faces. The patient typically complains of 'loss of memory for words' and has fluent, empty speech with substitutions such as 'thing' 'one of those' etc., but the grammatical aspects are preserved. Naming is impaired with semantically based errors (such as 'animal' or 'horse' for zebra). Patients are unable to understand less frequent words and fail on a range of semantically based tasks such as matching words to pictures and matching pictures according to their meaning. Repetition of words and phrases is normal even though patients are unaware of their meaning. Unlike patients with Alzheimer's disease, day-to-day memory (episodic memory) with good visuospatial skills and non-verbal problem-solving ability is relatively preserved, at least in the early stages.
Another form of progressive focal atrophy, described by Mesulam, produces progressive non-fluent aphasia. Such patients present with a gradual loss of expressive abilities and gross impairments in the phonological (sound-based) and grammatical aspects of language production. This leads to non-fluent, agrammatical, and poorly articulated speech with multiple phonological errors (for example, sitter for sister or fencil for pencil). Repetition of multisyllabic words and phrases is impaired but, in contrast to semantic dementia, word comprehension and object recognition are well preserved.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of frontotemporal dementia is based on the clinical, neuropsychological, and imaging assessments. The consensus broad clinical criteria are shown in Table 5. The differences between the various syndromes described above is obvious early in the disease, but there is increasing overlap between the temporal and frontal syndromes as the disease progresses. MRI demonstrates a characteristic pattern of frontal and/or temporal lobe atrophy: in contrast to Alzheimer's disease, the changes involve the polar and lateral temporal structures and are asymmetrical, commonly involving the left side to a greater extent (see Fig. 5). The functional imaging (single-photon emission tomography (SPECT) or positron emisson tomography (PET) ) findings mirror the structural imaging results, with reduced frontotemporal perfusion and hypometabolism.