Pseudodementia
This term has been used to describe two disorders namely: depressive pseudodementia and hysterical pseudodementia. Cognitive symptoms are common in depression, particularly in the elderly population. The main complaints are of poor recent memory and concentration with distractibility. There is often a lack of subjective feelings of depression, thereby making the diagnosis difficult. The telltale signs are the so-called biological features of depression, such as sleep disturbance and a loss of appetite and libido. Other common symptoms are low energy and a lack of interest in hobbies and activities. There may be a past personal or familial history of depression. The cognitive picture is of impaired attention and subsequent patchy performance on memory and frontal tasks. There may be some inconsistency in test performance and patients easily give up on a task. Language output may be sparse but paraphrasic errors are not present. Even after detailed testing it may be difficult to distinguish depression from dementia, indeed there may also be some overlap between the syndromes in the elderly. For this reason, ideal
practice would be for all newly presenting patients with dementia to undergo psychiatric assessment, and if any doubt remains a therapeutic trial of antidepressants may be warranted.
Hysterical pseudodementia commonly presents with a rapid onset of memory and/or intellectual impairment. There is loss of personal identity and salient personal and life events, which is unlike organic disorders of memory. There may be an obvious precipitant (such as marital problems, financial problems, or trouble with the law) and a past psychiatric history is common. 'Ganser syndrome' is a name for the condition where the patient gives bizarrely wrong answers to questions. For example, when asked 'How many legs does a horse have', they reply three or five. Even with such functional states, the examiner has to be aware of the potential concomitant organic disorder exaggerating the condition, as in other conversion disorders.