Treatable causes of dementia
Normal-pressure hydrocephalus: Normal-pressure hydrocephalus has a classic triad of presenting features: cognitive impairment, gait disturbance, and incontinence. The cognitive features are typically those of a subcortical dementia with frontal features and psychomotor slowing. The gait disorder is a dyspraxia and may show the pathognomonic feature of 'being stuck to the floor', although there is an absence of signs when the patient is examined in the supine position. The condition may be secondary to a prior disturbance of cerebrospinal fluid flow (resulting from, for example, a head injury, meningitis, or a subarachnoid haemorrhage), but often no cause is found in the elderly. Neuroimaging shows ventricular enlargement disproportionate to the degree of cortical atrophy. The presence of periventricular lesions can make the distinction from vascular dementia difficult. The investigation and management of these patients should be undertaken by the neurosurgeons, the definitive treatment being ventricular shunting. If treated early the prognosis is good.
Chronic subdural haematomas: This treatable cause of dementia is caused by head trauma. It is common in individuals at risk of recurrent head injuries, such as the elderly, alcoholics, and people
with epilepsy. Risk is also increased by coagulation disorders, either pathological or iatrogenic. The clinical features are of a subacute dementia with symptoms of raised intracranial pressure and fluctuating cognitive performance and focal neurological signs. Diagnosis is confirmed by neuroimaging, the peripheral mass lesions may be of varying signal density on CT, depending on the age of the lesion. If the lesions are isodense with the brain tissue, the diagnosis can be easily overlooked.
Treatment is by neurosurgical evacuation, except in clinically insignificant collections. Although the outcome is good, about 10 to 40 per cent of patients have a
recurrence that may require a further drainage.
Benign tumours: Subfrontal meningiomas are the classic tumours that present with features of a frontal dementia. The onset is usually insidious with personality changes and other frontal features. Besides the neuropsychological abnormalities there may be anosmia or unilateral visual failure and optic atrophy. Other relatively benign midline tumours occasionally present with hydrocephalus and cognitive impairment secondarily to this (for example, colloid cysts of the third ventricle and non-secretory pituitary tumours).
Metabolic and endocrine disorders: Metabolic derangements can give rise to acute-onset cognitive impairments, but the features are invariably those of a delirium rather than a dementia. Chronic hypocalcaemia and recurrent hypoglycaemia can result in a dementia often accompanied by ataxia and involuntary movements. Endocrine disorders can more
frequently present with a dementia syndrome, with or without psychiatric features (for example, hypothyroidism, Addison's disease, and hypopituitism). The prominent
complaints common to most disorders are mental slowing, apathy, and poor memory. Cushing's disease can present with psychiatric features, although a dementia syndrome is rarer. Although not strictly an endocrine disorder, Hashimoto's encephalopathy is a recently recognized cause of chronic delirium or dementia, often accompanied by seizures and fluctuating focal neurological signs. The diagnosis is made by finding extremely high levels of anti-thyroid antibodies despite a
euthyroid state. Patients respond well to high-dose steroid therapy.
Deficiency states: Vitamin B12 deficiency can cause the classic picture of subacute combined degeneration of the spinal cord and a dementia. The dementia can be variable in severity and it is unusual to present without some features of peripheral neurological disease, at least, diminished vibration sense in the lower limbs and/or sensory ataxia. Reflexes can be increased, decreased, or mixed. Although most patients have a macrocytic anaemia, neurological manifestations can occasionally occur in the absence of haematological features. Severe thiamin (vitamin B1) deficiency results in the Wernicke–Korsakoff syndrome, with delirium, ataxia, and ophthaloplegia. The commonest causes are alcoholism and recurrent prolonged vomiting, such as hyperemesis gravidarum. If not promptly treated a chronic amnesic syndrome can occur.
Infections: Neurosyphilis, once a common cause of dementia, is now rare. The associated neurological features include pupillary abnormalities, optic atrophy, ataxia, and pyramidal signs. The diagnosis is confirmed with serology and examination of cerebrospinal fluid. Treatment with penicillin can result in some improvement. Those at increased risk are people inadequately treated for syphilis and those infected with the human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV). HIV infection is an increasingly common
cause of dementia in some parts of the world. The encephalopathy (AIDS–dementia complex) is characterized by psychomotor slowing, personality change, and other features of a subcortical dementia. Examination of the cerebrospinal fluid can show a pleocytosis and increased protein and oligoclonal bands. White-matter changes are visible on neuroimaging. Cognitive changes in patients with HIV may also be due to opportunistic infections such as cerebral toxoplasmosis and cryptococcal meningitis and progressive multifocal leucoencephalopathy, which all require specific treatment.