Vascular dementia
Postmortem studies of patients with multi-infarct dementia show that Alzheimer's changes commonly coexist. Conversely, the advent of sensitive instruments for detecting cerebral vascular lesions in vivo (magnetic resonance imaging), has revealed that presumed vascular changes are common in patients with the clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease, even in young patients with known gene mutations, and that the presence of vascular lesions may be contributing to the severity of Alzheimer's disease. It is increasingly apparent that traditional risk factors for vascular dementia—including hypertension, diabetes, hypercholesterolaemia—are also factors which increase the likelihood of developing Alzheimer's disease.
Large infarcts
Recurrent cerebral infarcts involving multiple main arterial territories (for example, posterior or middle cerebral artery territories), resulting from thrombosis or
embolism, can cause dementia with a step-wise cognitive decline. There is commonly a history of atherosclerotic risk factors (for example, hypertension, smoking, and
hypercholesterolaemia), other evidence of atherosclerotic cardiac or peripheral vascular disease, and neurological signs on examination (for example, spasticity, hyperreflexia, extensor plantor responses, and a pseudobulbar palsy). There are often asymmetries on the neurological examination, and gait apraxia and/or bladder dysfunction can be early features. The cognitive picture is characterized by cortical features and is dependent on the sites of the lesions. There is often severe language impairment, visuospatial disturbance, amnesia, and dyspraxia, related to lesions in the middle and posterior cerebral artery distributions. Specific syndromes can result from discrete lesions: for example, lesions of the left angular gyrus result in a fluent aphasia, agraphia, acalculia, right–left disorientation, and finger agnosia or Gerstmann's syndrome.
Lacunar infarcts The small multiple lacunar lesions are caused by occlusion in the deep penetrating arterial branches. The underlying pathogenic mechanism is a distinct small-vessel arteriopathy with replacement of the muscle and elastin in the arterial wall by collagen, leading to tortuous vessel and microaneurysm formation as a result of long-standing hypertension. The basal ganglia, thalamus, and deep white matter are common sites for lesions, due to the nature of the arterial supply. These lacunes
may coexist with the larger infarcts (described above) thereby contributing to a mixed picture. However, the typical presentation of the lacunar state is with a more subcortical syndrome causing impaired attention and frontal executive malfunction, forgetfulness, apathy, and emotional lability. Thalamic lacunes can result in a speech disorder and, if bilateral, in amnesia. Examination features are similar to those seen with larger infarcts, with rigidity, gait disturbance, and extrapyramidal and
pyramidal signs.
Small-vessel disease (Binswanger's disease)
'Binswanger's disease' (or 'diffuse leucoaryosis') is the term applied to the radiologically defined syndrome of confluent subcortical and corpus callosal demyelination and loss of the cerebral white matter, which again typically complicates severe or accelerated hypertension. The clinical features are similar to those of the lacunar state described above. On CT there is symmetrical diffuse low-density periventricular hypodensity, which can be accompanied by ventricular dilatation. This is visualized with great sensitivity on T2-weighted MRI as a diffuse white-matter of high intensity. Pathologically, there is demyelination, axonal loss, and gliosis, thought to be due to diffuse ischaemia in the territory of the long perforating arteries.
Cerebral amyloid angiopathy 
Amyloid is deposited in the cerebral vessels both with increasing age and in a proportion of cases with ordinary Alzheimer's disease. However, there is also a rare and sometimes familial form of cerebral amyloidosis that produces recurrent cerebral haemorrhages and an Alzheimer's type dementia. Amyloid deposition in the vessel walls causes structural weakness leading to intracerebral haemorrhages and narrowing of the vessel to produce ischaemia. The haemorrhages tend to be lobar and can be recurrent.
Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leucoencephalopathy (CADASIL)
This recently established disorder may be a commoner cause of vascular dementia than previously realized. Patients present in their early twenties with migraine-like headaches and subsequently develop stroke-like episodes, which are sometimes ascribed to migraine or may mimic the attacks of acute demyelination. A subcortical dementia syndrome develops during their fifth and sixth decades. MRI shows multiple subcortical infarcts and diffuse white-matter disease. Other clues to the diagnosis are the absence of risk factors for atherosclerotic disease and the strong family history. Pathologically there is a distinctive non-amyloid, non-atherosclerotic angiopathy of the leptomeningeal and perforating arteries of the brain, with eosinophilic granular substance replacing smooth muscle. The diagnosis can be also confirmed with the finding of the same pathological changes in the cutaneous blood vessels in a skin biopsy. Mutations in the notch3 gene on chromosome 19 have been reported in patients with CADASIL.